0.6.0
=====

p5 version 0.6.0 is the final release for the `Google Summer of Code
2019 project
<https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/projects/#4911995556462592>`_ by
`Arihant Parsoya <https://github.com/parsoyaarihant>`_. The project was supervised
by `Abhik Pal <https://github.com/abhikpal>`_  and `Sam Lavigne <https://github.com/antiboredom>`_ of the
`Processing Foundation <https://processingfoundation.org/>`_. The goals
of the project were:

#. Add tutorials and examples for Processing modules
#. Complete typography module
#. Improving the Shape Class
#. Adding test suit to p5.py modules
#. Add 3D capabilities

We met the goals 1-4 completely. The last goal was completed partially as
we were facing issues with vispy depth testing. Examples and tutorials for all the modules is added and can be accessed at p5py documentation website. A detailed breakdown for every 
goal is documented as a `Github milestone <https://github.com/p5py/p5/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%22Google+Summer+of+Code+2019%22>`_.

API Additions
-------------

* Typography methods :meth:`p5.text_align`, :meth:`p5.text_leading` and :meth:`p5.text_size` allows the user to control different position and size attributes of the text. Methods :meth:`p5.text_ascent`, :meth:`p5.text_descent` and :meth:`p5.text_width` can be used to obtain different dimensional attributes of text.

* :func:`p5.load_shape` function allows the user to load an SVG file which can be rendered on the screen. The SVG shape is converted into PShape primitives and rendered on the screen using :func:`p5.shape` method.

* The methods :func:`p5.begin_shape` and :func:`p5.end_shape` can be used to make custom shapes defined by different vertex types (:func:`p5.vertex`, :func:`p5.curve_vertex`, :func:`p5.bezier_vertex`, :func:`p5.quadratic_vertex`). Contours inside a shape can also be created using  :func:`p5.begin_contour` and :func:`p5.end_contour` methods.

* Stroke methods allows the user to control the stroke width and styles:

  - :func:`p5.stroke_weight`: allows for specifying the width of stroke
  - :func:`p5.stroke_cap`: allows the user to set the style of line endings
  - :func:`p5.stroke_join`: allows the user to set the style of joints which connect the line segments

* This release introduces limited 3D support. New functions for :

  - The :meth:`p5.camera` allows for specifying the camera coordinates in 3D space
  - The projection functions :meth:`p5.ortho` and :meth:`p5.perspective` allow the user to control the type of projection system being used to render 3D objects on the screen
  - New 3D shape primitives are added: :func:`p5.box`, :func:`p5.plane`, :func:`p5.sphere`, :func:`p5.ellipsoid`, :func:`p5.cylinder`, :func:`p5.cone`, :func:`p5.torus`
