0.8.0
=====

We are happy to announce another developmental release under the summer fellowship at `The Processing Foundation <https://processingfoundation.org/>`_.
The project was supervised by `Mark Zhang <https://github.com/ziyaointl>`_. This release comes with an experimental 2D renderer using `Skia <https://skia.org/>`_.
The skia 2D renderer shows significance improvements in both rendering and efficiency of the sketches.

Bug Fixes
--------------
- #276
- #311
- #308
- #309
- #355
- #352

New Features
------------

- Along with the snake_case convention we support the camelCase convention for most Processing APIs #280
- New experimental 2D renderer "skia" #344. Skia currently does not support typography and Image APIs, they will be implemented in further releases.

List of New APIs
----------------------
  - :any:`frame_rate` sets frame rate for a sketch (only for skia)
  - :any:`rect` now supports border radius (only for skia)
  - :any:`CORNERS` CORNERS mode added (only for skia)
  - :any:`focussed` holds whether the current window is in focus or not (only for skia)

All the API previously present are supported as well in skia.

``Here are some profiling results comparing the time taken to draw 100 frames for different sketches``

==============  =====  =======
Name            Skia   Vispy
==============  =====  =======
arcs            2.11s  10.06s
custom_shapes   1.84s  5.00s
triangle_strip  2.55s  3.33s
custom_shapes2  2.02s  4.14s
curves          1.76s  5.41s
primitives      1.73s  3.9s
==============  =====  =======

This release includes contributions from @tushar5526, @niklasr22, @ziyaointl, @nakul-shahdadpuri, @andreasWallner, @janbehrens, @yogeshhk, @cuppajoeman,
@willtryagain, @parsoyaarihant, @Kartik-byte, @Andy-Python-Programmer, @Mr-Sunglasses, Thank you!




v0.8.1
======

We are happy to announce the final developmental release under the
summer fellowship at `The Processing
Foundation <https://processingfoundation.org/>`__ The project was
supervised by `Mark Zhang <https://github.com/ziyaointl>`__. This
release adds on to the experimental 2D renderer using
`Skia <https://skia.org>`__.

New Features
------------

Typography support for skia #371
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   - p5py now support all types of fonts as found in other processing ports
   - 5x efficiency in font sketches as compared to vispy renderer

Image APIs for “skia” #344
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for Offscreen buffers #386
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   - create_grahpics is now available in p5py's skia renderer

Support for python 3.10 #395
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   - Please see the attached note below

This release includes contributions from @tushar5526, @ziyaointl, and
@Mr-Sunglasses, Thank you!

PS: There are a lot of good open issues that currently need help and we
would love your contributions!

NOTE
----

``pyopengl-accelarate`` is omitted from the ``requirements.txt``
temporarily. See #397 for more information about this. If you are
looking for better 3D performance you can install it from the
``requirements.txt`` file.

+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| benchmark        | with             | without          | change |
|                  | pyo              | pyo              |        |
|                  | pengl-accelerate | pengl-accelerate |        |
+==================+==================+==================+========+
| arcs             | 8.944169         | 9.764988         | 9.18%  |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| arm              | 2.612446         | 2.611884         | -0.02% |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| basic_shapes     | 2.629553         | 2.688781         | 2.25%  |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| begin_contour    | 2.684205         | 2.711441         | 1.01%  |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| curves           | 4.766132         | 4.962305         | 4.12%  |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| custom_shapes    | 4.643741         | 4.754362         | 2.38%  |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| custom_shapes2   | 3.75905          | 3.791483         | 0.86%  |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| point_demo       | 2.880713         | 2.939999         | 2.06%  |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| primitives       | 3.651718         | 3.717032         | 1.79%  |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| s                | 9.417307         | 9.437273         | 0.21%  |
| pinning-cone_p3d |                  |                  |        |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| tetrahedron_p3d  | 8.114283         | 8.203861         | 1.10%  |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| triangle_strip   | 3.228278         | 3.228012         | -0.01% |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
| world_p3d        | 26.883501        | 26.991062        | 0.40%  |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+


0.8.2
=====

This is a minor release that fixes a few bugs and adds a few new features.

- `pyopengl-accelarate` upstream issue was fixed and we can install the package now on Linux. 
- Fixed `preload` bug